### What is civic technology, and how can smart cities benefit from it?

Civic technology broadly encompasses the technological tools used by governments, agencies, and public sector organizations to enhance public health, safety, civic processes, and necessary services. Its applications for municipalities in developing smart cities are only bounded by the willingness of collaboration and expertise between management and personnel to pursue modern solutions to today’s civic problems. Civic technology and the Internet of Things create an environment for smart cities to flourish (All Things Open 2025). For example, the use of sensors and cameras as inputs to adaptive traffic signal phasing, may produce fairer and more efficient cycles for vehicle and pedestrian movement. Encouraging fairer and more efficient movement throughout the city means better accessibility, which can contribute to better wellbeing and quality of life, and perhaps better perceptions of municipal government—traits of a smarter city (Connolly-Barker et al. 2020).

Open data portals are another case of civic technology and its importance to smart cities. Specifically in the City of Chicago, the volumes of datasets and technical expertise within the city have encouraged civic “hacktivism” (Eder 2018). Interested groups and individuals can access public datasets for the purpose of doing their own research, modeling, and activism. This can have the impact of creating more accountability for elected officials and government institutions as we know them. An example given in Derek Eder’s Chi Hack Night video titled “The opportunity of Civic Tech” is the instance of snowplowing in the winter time. GPS-enabled monitoring of the snow plows allowed citizens to identify a pattern of a single Chicago alderman’s street being prioritized in the routes—which signaled to citizens at worst an abuse of power, or at best an information asymmetry (18:21). Using technology in this manner to increase consciousness of citizens and foster accountability and transparency in their government, arguably contributes to a stronger democracy and smarter city. Civic technology, thus, leverages technological innovation in general and applies it to public contexts, in turn modernizing and potentially automating processes in institutions like government, which may be seen as latent and harmfully bureaucratic.

References:

Connolly-Barker, Melissa, Tomas Kliestik, Petr Suler, Katarina Zvarikova. “Real-time Decision-Making in the Information Technology-driven Economy: Planning, Managing, and Operating Smart Sustainable Cities.” Geopolitics, History, and International Relations 12, no. 1(2020): 73-79. <https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26918287>

Eder, Derek. The opportunity of civic tech. Chi Hack Night. Aug 23, 2018. Video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n8Szo6sk4so&t=1s>\

Steve Rao on smart cities, civic tech, and building AI-ready government. All Things Open. Aug 9, 2025. Video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Liu8byhopJo>
